Dev guide for WHERE predicate pushdown (#13814)
trinodb/trino: docs/src/main/sphinx/develop/connectors.rst

                        .addAll(newExpressions)
                        .build().asList();
                remainingExpression = Optional.of(and(remainingExpressions));
            }
            else {
                newConstraintExpressions = ImmutableList.of();
                remainingExpression = Optional.empty();
            }
        }

        // Return empty Optional if nothing changed in filtering
        if (oldDomain.equals(newDomain) &&
                handle.getConstraintExpressions().equals(newConstraintExpressions)) {
            return Optional.empty();
        }

        handle = new JdbcTableHandle(
                handle.getRelationHandle(),
                newDomain,
                newConstraintExpressions,
                ...);

        return Optional.of(
                remainingExpression.isPresent()
                        ? new ConstraintApplicationResult<>(handle, remainingFilter, remainingExpression.get(), precalculateStatisticsForPushdown)
                        : new ConstraintApplicationResult<>(handle, remainingFilter, precalculateStatisticsForPushdown));
    }

In this example we are implementing a base class for many JDBC connectors,

> so we have to handle all the nuances of different JDBC-capable databases.

Reviewer: If this doesn't explain all the nuances, only the one example below, it's not relevant. Can you rephrase this to be more explicit about having to ensure that if a constraint gets pushed down, it should work exactly the same in the underlying data source and produce the same results?

For example, string comparison in some databases is case-insensitive, which
means for those databases we can't push it down since it would change it's
meaning.

To handle push down for all the different types we need to ask our JDBC client
for a ``ColumnMapping`` which can produce a ``PredicatePushdownController``

> which decides if a column domain can be pushed down.

Reviewer: This is confusing. I'm not sure how I'd use this information when writing a non-JDBC connector. Note that I think we should have a whole separate page about JDBC connectors.

Once the ``TupleDomains`` are handled, expressions can be pushed down as well.
We split the constraint expression into conjuncts - smaller expressions joined

> with AND - and handle them individually. Each one is converted using

Reviewer: This is too passive, who handles the `TupleDomains`? Where do the expressions get split? Does this need to happen in the connector?

Otherwise, these methods return a result object containing a new table handle.

Each of these methods receives the table handle created thus far, and can add
additional push down information to it by returning a new table handle created

> from the old one.

Reviewer: This paragraph duplicates the next one and the previous one combined. What are you trying to say here that's not already in the surrounding paragraphs?

error code and an actionable message, to let users know how to write a valid
query.

.. _dev-predicate-pushdown:

Predicate pushdown
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> When executing a query with a ``WHERE`` clause, the query plan may

Author: It's always possible for the `ScanFilterProject` operation to be optimized out at a higher level, so I think the best we can do is "will likely contain".

comparison is case-sensitive.

To handle push down for all the different JDBC types we need a
``PredicatePushdownController`` which decides if a column domain
can be pushed down. In the example code above we obtain it from a
``JdbcClient`` implementation specific to that database. Note that
this interface is only needed because we are trying to be generic. In non-JDBC
databases the rules for pushing down different types would usually be
implemented directly, without going through a ``PredicatePushdownController``
interface.

Once we split all ``TupleDomains`` into those that can be pushed down, and
those which will be handled in Trino, expressions can be separated as well.
We start by splitting each constraint expression into conjuncts - smaller
expressions joined with AND - and handle each conjunct individually. Each one
is converted using connector-specific rules, as defined by our ``JdbcClient``
implementation to be more flexible. This provides an opportunity for each
JDBC-based connector to use the full expressive power of the underlying database
language. Those conjuncts which weren't converted are returned as

> ``remainingExpression`` and will be evaluated by the Trino engine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``remainingExpression`` and are evaluated by the Trino engine.
```

error code and an actionable message, to let users know how to write a valid
query.

.. _dev-predicate-pushdown:

Predicate pushdown
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When executing a query with a ``WHERE`` clause, the query plan can
contain a ``ScanFilterProject`` operation with a predicate constraint.

A predicate constraint is a description of the constraint imposed on the
results of the query as expressed in the ``WHERE`` clause. For example,

> ``WHERE x > 5 AND y = 3`` translates into a ``Constraint`` where the

Reviewer 3: just constraint, no initial cap and no double backticks

``summary`` field means the ``x`` column's domain must be greater than
``5`` and the ``y`` column domain equals ``3``.

When the query plan contains a ``ScanFilterProject`` operation, Trino
tries to optimize the query by pushing down the predicate constraint
into the connector by calling the ``applyFilter`` method of the
connector metadata service. This method receives a table handle with

> all optimizations applied thus far, and should return either

Reviewer 3: and returns either 

(no should - it is against developer style guide)

``Optional.empty()`` or a response with a new table handle derived from
the old one.

The query optimizer may call ``applyFilter`` for a single query multiple times,

> as it searches for an optimal query plan. It's important that connectors

Reviewer 3: Connectors must return

> return ``Optional.empty()`` from ``applyFilter`` if they can't apply the

Reviewer 3: cannot

(no contractions - against developer style guide)

> constraint for this invocation even if they support ``ScanFilterProject``

Reviewer 3: invocation, even

> pushdown in general. It's also important to return ``Optional.empty()`` if the

Reviewer 3: Connectors must also return

constraint has already been applied.

A constraint contains:

* a ``TupleDomain`` summary of possible values (or ranges) for different
  columns,
* an expression for pushing down function calls,
* a map of assignments from variables in the expression to columns,
* (optional) a predicate which tests a map of columns and their values,
  it cannot be held on to after the ``applyFilter`` call returns
* (optional) a set of columns the predicate depends on, must be present
  if predicate is present.

A ``TupleDomain`` defines a mapping between columns and their domains.
A ``Domain`` is either a list of possible values or a list of ranges.

> It also contains information about nullability.

Reviewer 3: A constraint contains the following elements:

* A ``TupleDomain`` defining the mapping between columns and their domains. A ``Domain`` is either a list of possible values, or a list of ranges, and also contains information about nullability.
* Expression for pushing down function calls.
* Map of assignments from variables in the expression to columns.
* (optional) Predicate which tests a map of columns and their values;
  it cannot be held on to after the ``applyFilter`` call returns.
* (optional) Set of columns the predicate depends on; must be present
  if predicate is present.

If both a predicate and a summary are available, the predicate is guaranteed to
be more strict in filtering of values, and can provide a significant boost to
query performance if used.

> However it's not possible to store a predicate in the table handle and use

Reviewer 3: It is not possible to

it later, as the predicate cannot be held on to after the ``applyFilter``
call returns. This means it can be used for filtering of entire DB
partitions/shards and is not actually pushed down. It's also safe to ignore it,
and focus only on ``summary``.
In such case, the summary can still be pushed down by storing it in the table
handle.

This overlap between the predicate and summary is due to historical reasons,
as simple comparison pushdown was implemented first via summary, and more
complex filters such as ``LIKE`` which required more expressive predicates
were added later.

> If a constraint can only be pushed down partially, for example when a connector

Reviewer 3: partially pushed down

> for a database that doesn't support range matching is used in a query with

Reviewer 3: does not

error code and an actionable message, to let users know how to write a valid
query.

.. _predicate-pushdown:

Predicate pushdown
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When executing a query with a ``WHERE`` clause, the query plan may
contain a ``Filter`` operation.

> When the query plan contains a ``Filter`` operation, the Trino engine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the query plan contains a ``Filter`` operation, Trino
```

tries to optimize the query by pushing down the predicate constraint
into the connector by calling the ``applyFilter`` method of the
connector metadata service. This method receives a table handle with
all optimizations applied thus far, and should return either
``Optional.empty()`` or a response with a new table handle derived from
the old one. The constraint which will eventually be applied on the
underlying source level is accumulated over multiple calls in a
``ConnectorTableHandle``.  Once the query actually runs,
``ConnectorRecordSetProvider`` or ``ConnectorPageSourceProvider``

> use whatever optimizations were pushed down to ``ConnectorTableHandle``.

Reviewer: This is true for all `applyXXX` functions, so maybe it should be added earlier, somewhere around line 250?

The query optimizer may call ``applyFilter`` for a single query multiple times,
as it searches for an optimal query plan. It's important that connectors
return ``Optional.empty()`` from ``applyFilter`` if they can't apply the

> constraint for this invocation even if they support ``WHERE`` clause pushdown

Reviewer: Connectors push down the `Filter` operation, not the `WHERE` clause.

in general. It's also important to return ``Optional.empty()`` if the

> constraint has already been applied by some previous invocation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
constraint has already been applied.
```

A constraint contains:

* a ``TupleDomain`` summary of possible values (or ranges) for different
  columns,
* an expression for pushing down function calls,
* a map of assignments from variables in the expression to columns,
* (optional) a predicate which tests a map of columns and their values,
  it cannot be held on to after the ``applyFilter`` call returns
* (optional) a set of columns the predicate depends on, must be present
  if predicate is present.

A ``TupleDomain`` defines a mapping between columns and their domains.
A ``Domain`` is either a list of possible values or a list of ranges.
It also contains information about nullability.

If both a predicate and a summary are available, handling the predicate
is preferred over handling the summary, as the predicate is guaranteed
to be more strict in filtering out values.
However it's not possible to store a predicate in the table handle and use
it later, as the predicate cannot be held on to after the ``applyFilter``
call returns. This means a predicate can only be used for immediate

> filtering of entire Hive partitions/DB shards and is not actually pushed down.

Reviewer: This guide should not refer to any specific connectors. What does `immediate filtering` mean? `applyFilter` doesn't handle any data, other services do, like the split manager and record set provider (or page source provider).

Author: By `immediate filtering` I meant filtering that occurs inside `applyFilter`, since we can't store the predicate in a `TableHandle`. How this would be done depends on the DB implementation - in Hive connector we query the HMS for partitions, filter them using the predicate, and store the resulting list in `HiveTableHandle`. I guess sharded DBs could use a similar approach if their API allows querying for a list of shard keys.

Reviewer: This is an implementation detail that we shouldn't include in the guide. I'm not entirely sure if `applyFilter` should be doing time-consuming operations like talking to external services, since query planning should be done as quickly as possible. Instead, maybe it's better to do it in the split manager, using the table handle returned here.

It's enough to say that predicate objects cannot be reused outside of this method, we don't need to go into details about how to deal with it.

This overlap between the predicate and summary is due to historical reasons,
as simple comparison pushdown was implemented first via summary, and more
complex filters such as ``LIKE`` which required more expressive predicates

> were added later.

Reviewer: How is that important when developing a new connector? If a connector could only handle either the summary or predicates, can this be stated explicitly?

Reviewer: The API ambiguity should be explained by git commits or in the API Javadocs.

Regarding the preference, it should be possible only to handle one kind of constraint, either the summary or predicate, not both. So instead of writing (pseudo) code like:
```
if (predicate) {
 // handle predicate
} else {
 // handle summary
}
```
I'd rather write:
```
if (summary) {
  // handle
}
```
Are there cases when a predicate is present but the summary is not? Is that a bug?

Author: I think there can be cases where the summary is present, but there is no predicate, but not the other way around.

Author: Also, handling of the predicate is entirely optional - it's correct (but less efficient) to ignore it and focus on summary.

> If a constraint can only be pushed down partially, e.g. a connector for
> a database which doesn't support range matching receives a query with

Reviewer: Connectors don't receive queries. They are used in catalogs which can be referenced in queries.
```suggestion
If a constraint can only be pushed down partially, e.g. a connector for
a database that doesn't support range matching is used in a query with
```

``WHERE x = 2 AND y > 5``, the ``y`` column constraint should be
returned in the ``ConstraintApplicationResult`` from ``applyFilter``.

> In this case the ``y > 5`` part of the filter will be applied by Trino
> engine, and not pushed down.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case the ``y > 5`` part of the filter will be applied Trino,
and not pushed down.
```

Predicate pushdown
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

When executing a query with a ``WHERE`` clause, the query plan will likely
contain a ``ScanFilterProject`` operation with a predicate constraint.

A predicate constraint is a description of the constraint imposed on the
results of the query as expressed in the ``WHERE`` clause. For example

> ``WHERE x > 5 AND y = 3`` would translate into a ``Constraint`` where the

Reviewer 3: No use of "would"

...= 3`` translates into

> ``summary`` field would say the ``x`` column's domain has to be greater than

Reviewer 3: - No use of "would"
- Do not use "say" - google style guide requires plain, non-idiomatic language, and inanimate objects don't actually say things. 
 
- You can use "means" instead of "would say".

Use "must be" instead of "has to be"

complex filters such as ``LIKE`` which required more expressive predicates
were added later.

> If a constraint can only be pushed down partially, for example a connector for

Reviewer 3: for example when a

a database that doesn't support range matching is used in a query with
``WHERE x = 2 AND y > 5``, the ``y`` column constraint should be
returned in the ``ConstraintApplicationResult`` from ``applyFilter``.

> In this case the ``y > 5`` part of the filter is applied in Trino,

Reviewer 3: In this case, the ``y > 5`` condition is

("part of the filter" is very informal. Please be specific about that part of the filter. It is a condition.

This pushdown implementation is quite similar to many Trino connectors
- see ``MongoMetadata``, ``BigQueryMetadata``, ``KafkaMetadata``.

Let's move on to a more complex example where the data types from Trino are not

> exactly represented in the underlying database (a simplified

Reviewer 3: Far too informal. This is blog post/user guide language, not reference material language. the material in the parenthesis does not make sense and in general, parenthesis should be avoided at all costs.. "Not exactly represented" is confusing phrasing.

Suggest:

The following, more complex example shows data types from Trino that are available directly in the underlying data source, and must be mapped:

            Map<ColumnHandle, Domain> unsupported = new HashMap<>();
            for (int i = 0; i < columnHandles.size(); i++) {
                JdbcColumnHandle column = columnHandles.get(i);
                DomainPushdownResult pushdownResult =
                    columnMappings.get(i).getPredicatePushdownController().apply(
                        session,
                        domains.get(column));
                supported.put(column, pushdownResult.getPushedDown());
                unsupported.put(column, pushdownResult.getRemainingFilter());
            }

            newDomain = TupleDomain.withColumnDomains(supported);
            remainingFilter = TupleDomain.withColumnDomains(unsupported);
        }

        // Return empty Optional if nothing changed in filtering
        if (oldDomain.equals(newDomain)) {
            return Optional.empty();
        }

        handle = new JdbcTableHandle(
                handle.getRelationHandle(),
                newDomain,
                ...);

        return Optional.of(
                new ConstraintApplicationResult<>(
                    handle,
                    remainingFilter));
    }

> In this example we are implementing a base class for many JDBC connectors,

Reviewer 3: Writing is too informal/blog-posty.

This example illustrates implementing a base class for many JDBC connectors while handling the specific requirements of multiple JDBC-compliant data sources. It ensure that if a constraint gets pushed down, it works
exactly the same in the underlying data source, and produce the same results
as it would in Trino.

so we have to handle all the nuances of different JDBC-capable databases.
We need to ensure that if a constraint gets pushed down, it should work
exactly the same in the underlying data source and produce the same results
as it would in Trino.

> For example, string comparison in some databases is case-insensitive, which

Reviewer 3: Move this to previous paragraph. 

Do not use "we" - too informal.

For example, in databases where string comparisons are is case-insensitive, pushdown does not work, as string
comparison operations in Trino are case-sensitive.

means for those databases we can't push it down since in Trino string
comparison is case-sensitive.

To handle push down for all the different JDBC types we need a
``PredicatePushdownController`` which decides if a column domain
can be pushed down. In the example code above we obtain it from a
``JdbcClient`` implementation specific to that database. Note that
this interface is only needed because we are trying to be generic. In non-JDBC
databases the rules for pushing down different types would usually be
implemented directly, without going through a ``PredicatePushdownController``
interface.

> Now let's add expression pushdown to our code, enabled by a session flag:

Reviewer 3: Do not use "we" - too informal.
Do not use "usually" (or "could"  or "would") as per google dev style guide. In reference material, writing must be definite.
Do not use directions such as above, below. User following/preceding (g dev style guide)

Also, I have used "interface" below, because you seem to call it an interface in the paragraph. Please ensure that it is being named *precisely* what it is (interface/class/method, etc).

The ``PredicatePushdownController`` interface determines if a column domain can be pushed down in JDBC-compliant data sources. In the preceding example, it is called from a ``JdbcClient`` implementation specific to that database. In non-JDBC-compliant data sources, type-based push downs are implemented directly, without going through the ``PredicatePushdownController`` interface.

Now let's add expression pushdown to our code, enabled by a session flag:
